Mastermind (board game)
Mastermind or Master Mind is a code-breaking game for
two players. The modern game with pegs was invented in
1970 by Mordecai Meirowitz, an Israeli postmaster and
telecommunications expert.[1][2] It resembles an earlier
pencil and paper game called Bulls and Cows that may
date back a century or more.

1

Gameplay and rules

The game is played using:
• a decoding board, with a shield at one end covering a
row of four large holes, and twelve (or ten, or eight,
or six) additional rows containing four large holes
next to a set of four small holes;
• code pegs of six (or more; see Variations below) different colors, with round heads, which will be placed
in the large holes on the board; and

Screenshot of software implementation (ColorCode) illustrating
the example.

• key pegs, some colored black, some white, which are
ﬂat-headed and smaller than the code pegs; they will
be placed in the small holes on the board.
correct whites, nothing for the third white as there is not
a third white in the code, and a colored key peg for the
The two players decide in advance how many games they black. No indication is given of the fact that the code also
will play, which must be an even number. One player includes a second black.[5]
becomes the codemaker, the other the codebreaker. The
Once feedback is provided, another guess is made;
codemaker chooses a pattern of four code pegs. Dupliguesses and feedback continue to alternate until either the
cates are allowed, so the player could even choose four
codebreaker guesses correctly, or twelve (or ten, or eight)
code pegs of the same color. The chosen pattern is placed
incorrect guesses are made.
in the four holes covered by the shield, visible to the codeThe codemaker gets one point for each guess a codemaker but not to the codebreaker.[3]
breaker makes. An extra point is earned by the codeThe codebreaker tries to guess the pattern, in both ormaker if the codebreaker doesn't guess the pattern exactly
der and color, within twelve (or ten, or eight) turns. Each
in the last guess. (An alternative is to score based on the
guess is made by placing a row of code pegs on the decodnumber of colored key pegs placed.) The winner is the
ing board. Once placed, the codemaker provides feedone who has the most points after the agreed-upon numback by placing from zero to four key pegs in the small
ber of games are played.
holes of the row with the guess. A colored or black key
[6]
peg is placed for each code peg from the guess which is Other rules may be speciﬁed.
correct in both color and position. A white key peg indicates the existence of a correct color code peg placed in
the wrong position.[4]
2 History
If there are duplicate colours in the guess, they cannot
all be awarded a key peg unless they correspond to the
same number of duplicate colours in the hidden code.
For example, if the hidden code is white-white-blackblack and the player guesses white-white-white-black, the
codemaker will award two colored key pegs for the two

A game called 'Moo' was used on the Cambridge Titan
shared computer system to help develop security applications by tempting hackers to modify the 'Moo League' of
scores as a harmless diversion. The game involved guessing four numbers, scoring 'Bulls’ or 'Cows’ for correct
1

2

3

numbers in the right or wrong places. Dr John Billingsley perceived that the game could be played equally effectively by his children with pencil and paper. Some
time before 1976 he was engaged in a consultancy with
Invicta Plastics, whose products at the time featured plastic inserts for footwear. He was asked if he could think
of a game that could use their technology and the game
of Moo sprang to mind. At the time, the TV quiz show
Mastermind was in vogue and he suggested that name,
never believing that it would be permitted. He inﬂuenced
the design of the board, insisting that the 'results’ pegs
should be arranged in a square rather than in a line, to
avoid each result being associated with a particular guess
peg. Thinking that the game was 'public domain' or that
the rights belonged elsewhere, he was unwilling to make
any claim for it.
Since 1971, the rights to Mastermind have been held by
Invicta Plastics of Oadby, near Leicester, UK. (Invicta
always named the game Master Mind.) They originally
manufactured it themselves, though they have since licensed its manufacture to Hasbro worldwide, with the exception of Pressman Toys and Orda Industries who have
the manufacturing rights to the United States and Israel,
respectively.[7]

ALGORITHMS

5. Otherwise, remove from S any code that would not
give the same response if it (the guess) were the
code.
6. Apply minimax technique to ﬁnd a next guess as
follows: For each possible guess, that is, any unused code of the 1296 not just those in S, calculate
how many possibilities in S would be eliminated for
each possible colored/white peg score. The score
of a guess is the minimum number of possibilities
it might eliminate from S. A single pass through S
for each unused code of the 1296 will provide a hit
count for each colored/white peg score found; the
colored/white peg score with the highest hit count
will eliminate the fewest possibilities; calculate the
score of a guess by using “minimum eliminated”
= “count of elements in S” - (minus) “highest hit
count”. From the set of guesses with the maximum
score, select one as the next guess, choosing a member of S whenever possible. (Knuth follows the convention of choosing the guess with the least numeric
value e.g. 2345 is lower than 3456. Knuth also gives
an example showing that in some cases no member
of S will be among the highest scoring guesses and
thus the guess cannot win on the next turn, yet will
be necessary to assure a win in ﬁve.)

Starting in 1973, the game box featured a photograph of
a well-dressed, distinguished-looking man seated in the
7. Repeat from step 3.
foreground, with a woman standing behind him. The two
amateur models (Bill Woodward and Cecilia Fung) reSubsequent mathematicians have been ﬁnding various alunited in June 2003 to pose for another publicity photo.[8]
gorithms that reduce the average number of turns needed
to solve the pattern: in 1993, Kenji Koyama and Tony
W. Lai found a method that required an average of
5625/1296 = 4.340 turns to solve, with a worst-case sce3 Algorithms
nario of six turns.[10] The minimax value in the sense of
game theory is 5600/1296 = 4.321.[11]
With four pegs and six colors, there are 64 = 1296 diﬀerent patterns (allowing duplicate colors).

3.2 Genetic algorithm
3.1

Five-guess algorithm

In 1977, Donald Knuth demonstrated that the codebreaker can solve the pattern in ﬁve moves or fewer, using an algorithm that progressively reduced the number
of possible patterns.[9] The algorithm works as follows:
1. Create the set S of 1296 possible codes (1111, 1112
... 6665, 6666)

A new algorithm with an embedded genetic algorithm,
where a large set of eligible codes is collected throughout
the diﬀerent generations. The quality of each of these
codes is determined based on a comparison with a selection of elements of the eligible set.[12][13] This algorithm
is based on a heuristic that assigns a score to each eligible combination based on its probability of actually being the hidden combination. Since this combination is
not known, the score is based on characteristics of the set
of eligible solutions or the sample of them found by the
evolutionary algorithm.

2. Start with initial guess 1122 (Knuth gives examples
showing that other ﬁrst guesses such as 1123, 1234 The algorithm works as follows:
do not win in ﬁve tries on every code)
1. Set i = 1
3. Play the guess to get a response of colored and white
2. Play ﬁxed initial guess G1
pegs.
4. If the response is four colored pegs, the game is won,
the algorithm terminates.

3. Get the response X1 and Y 1
4. Repeat while Xi ≠ P:

3
(a) Increment i

5 Clones

(b) Set Ei = ∅ and h = 1
(c) Initialize population
(d) Repeat while h ≤ maxgen and |Ei| ≤ maxsize:

There are at least four open-source software implementations of the game concept:

i. Generate new population using crossover,
mutation, inversion and permutation
ii. Calculate ﬁtness
iii. Add eligible combinations to Ei
iv. Increment h

• colorcode uses Qt[17]
• gnome-mastermind uses GTK+[18]
• GMastermind uses GNUstep[19]
• Guess is part of Simon Tatham’s Portable Puzzle
Collection[20]

(e) Play guess Gi which belongs to Ei
(f) Get response Xi and Yi

3.3

Complexity and the satisﬁability prob- 6
lem

In November 2004, Michiel de Bondt proved that solving
a Mastermind board is an NP-complete problem when
played with n pegs per row and two colors, by showing
how to represent any one-in-three 3SAT problem in it.
He also showed the same for Consistent Mastermind (playing the game so that every guess is a candidate for the secret code that is consistent with the hints in the previous
guesses).[14]
The Mastermind satisﬁability problem is a decision problem that asks, “Given a set of guesses and the number of
colored and white pegs scored for each guess, is there at
least one secret pattern that generates those exact scores?"
(If not, then the codemaker must have incorrectly scored
at least one guess.) In December 2005, Jeﬀ Stuckman
and Guo-Qiang Zhang showed in an arXiv article that the
Mastermind satisﬁability problem is NP-complete.[15]

4

Variations

See also
• Bulls and cows

7 References
[1] Nelson, Toby (9 March 2000). “A Brief History of the
Master Mind Board Game”. Retrieved 6 August 2014.
[2] “Mastermind Board Game”. Board Game Geek. Retrieved 6 August 2014.
[3] “Industrious”. Retrieved 2014-07-07.
[4] “Wolfram”. Retrieved 2012-07-09.
[5] “Archimedes”. Retrieved 2012-10-07.
[6] “Bulls and Cows & co.”. Retrieved 2012-07-07.
[7] “Invicta Toy History page”. Retrieved 2012-08-07.
[8] “Landmark Reunion for Mastermind Box Models”. Retrieved 2006-10-05.
[9] Knuth, Donald (1976–77). “The Computer as Master

Mind” (PDF). J. Recr. Math. (9): 1–6.
Varying the number of colors and the number of holes
results in a spectrum of Mastermind games of diﬀerent
[10] Koyama, Kenji; Lai, Tony (1993). “An Optimal Maslevels of diﬃculty. Another common variation is to suptermind Strategy”. Journal of Recreational Mathematics
port diﬀerent numbers of players taking on the roles of
(25): 230–256.
codemaker and codebreaker. The following are some examples of Mastermind games produced by Invicta, Parker [11] Knuth, Donald (2011). Selected papers on fun and games.
Center for the Study of Language and Information. p.
Brothers, Pressman, Hasbro, and other game manufactur226. ISBN 9781575865843.
ers:

The diﬃculty level of any of the above can be increased [12] Berghman, Lotte (2007–2008). “Eﬃcient solutions
for Mastermind using genetic algorithms” (PDF).
by treating “empty” as an additional color or decreased
K.U.Leuven (1): 1–15.
by requiring only that the code’s colors be guessed, independent of position.
[13] Merelo, J. J.; Mora, A. M.; Cotta, C.; Runarsson, T. P.
(2012). “An experimental study of exhaustive solutions
Computer and Internet versions of the game have also
for the Mastermind puzzle”. arXiv:1207.1315 .
been made, sometimes with variations in the number and
type of pieces involved and often under diﬀerent names
[14] De Bondt, Michiel C. (November 2004).
“NPto avoid trademark infringement. Mastermind can also
completeness of Master Mind and Minesweeper”. Radbe played with paper and pencil. There is a numeral
boud University Nijmegen.
variety of the Mastermind in which a 4-digit number is
[15] Mastermind is NP-Complete Retrieved 2010-09-02.
guessed.[16]

4

8

[16] “Bulls and Cows Classic”. [dead link]
[17] http://packages.debian.org/jessie/colorcode
[18] http://packages.debian.org/jessie/gnome-mastermind
[19] “GMastermind - GNUstep Mastermind Implementation”,
GNUstep Application Project, 15 July 2011.
[20] Simon Tatham’s Portable Puzzle Collection

8

External links
• Mastermind: An augment reality approach, Porting
a Legacy Game to New Interaction Paradigm
• Mathworld article on Mastermind
• Continuator of the game Supermind
• Mastermind program in C
• Mastermind for mobile devices (pure js no plugin
required)
• Online Mastermind for colorblind people
• Online demonstration of a 6-move guarantee for
(7,5) Mastermind
• Mastermind puzzle
• Classical Mastermind Strategies
• Algorithm::Mastermind is a Perl module with several algorithms that solve Mastermind, including
Knuth’s and an evolutionary algorithm.

EXTERNAL LINKS

5

9

Text and image sources, contributors, and licenses

9.1

Text

• Mastermind (board game) Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mastermind_(board_game)?oldid=735227152 Contributors: Damian
Yerrick, SGBailey, Ixfd64, DavidWBrooks, 5ko, Julesd, StevePowell, Val42, Shantavira, Yas~enwiki, Cgranade, Delpino, Smjg, Netoholic, Herbee, Solipsist, Bobblewik, Perstar, Noe, Rdsmith4, Udzu, Wfaulk, Ma'ame Michu, Autiger, ZeroOne, Kelvinc, Jaimedv,
Svdmolen, Dgpop, Jamesdowallen, Causa sui, Kappa, Blotwell, Millsdavid, Celada, Sigurdhu, Rray, Katana, MarkRose, SeanDuggan,
DreamGuy, Pgimeno~enwiki, Drat, Mindmatrix, Percy Snoodle, Sega381, Prashanthns, Graham87, Sango123, W3bbo, Nihiltres, Tofergregg, SGreen~enwiki, Bgwhite, Msfwebdude, NTBot~enwiki, RussBot, Thmars10, NawlinWiki, Chunky Rice, CLW, Mike Selinker,
Allens, Vanka5, SmackBot, Amit A., McGeddon, Zeycus, StephenJMuir, Chris the speller, Nixeagle, Doug Bell, Zahid Abdassabur, Jetman, Beno1000, Gilabrand, VinnieCool, Tolleranza, SimpleBeep, Nicklegends, Kafat, Starylon, Big Paradox, Tawkerbot4, JGrochow,
Exislander, Thijs!bot, Andyjsmith, Knordlun, AntiVandalBot, Res2216ﬁrestar, Thepeach, JAnDbot, MER-C, 100110100, JNW, CTF83!,
BitterAsHell, Froid, Onigame, Ztobor, Oren0, DomBot, NightFalcon90909, Spike2k6, Gblandst, Oldboltonian, Joshua Issac, Barraki,
Useight, Timotab, VolkovBot, TXiKiBoT, TheReincarnator, Klip game, Dirkbb, Mehmet Karatay, Ponyo, SieBot, ShiftFn, Milkeyedmender, Maxime.Debosschere, ImageRemovalBot, ClueBot, Chosang, Pointillist, Bender2k14, LeonardoGolden, Captpossum, Doprendek,
Alex Perrier, Versus22, Gabeh99, Masterminder~enwiki, Feinoha, Addbot, MrOllie, Lightbot, Zorrobot, Delta 51, Peni, Yobot, Amirobot,
Citation bot, ArthurBot, Tams11, Dog funtom, Gatorgirl7563, Lefschetz, Darkdanger16, Citation bot 1, I dream of horses, Tetron76,
Kgrad, Orenburg1, PaleZoe, Spakin, Ruotailfoglio, DASHBot, Palosirkka, Ihardlythinkso, ClueBot NG, Dmosn, Kasirbot, Brom479, BattyBot, Pratyya Ghosh, Artbylogic, Mikkosu, Semsi Paco Virchow, Monkbot, Orthogonal1, Totallywired80, Priya.ranjan290, Raunak cs300,
Serko70, ChazzanRocks, Jjmerelo, H.dryad, Codo777 and Anonymous: 180

9.2

Images

• File:ColorCode.png Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2a/ColorCode.png License: GPLv3 Contributors: Took
it myself. Original artist: Dirk Laebisch
• File:Free-to-read_lock_75.svg Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/80/Free-to-read_lock_75.svg License: CC0
Contributors: Adapted from 9px|Open_Access_logo_PLoS_white_green.svg Original artist: This version:Trappist_the_monk (talk)
(Uploads)
• File:Mastermind.jpg Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/2d/Mastermind.jpg License: CC BY-SA 2.0 Contributors: ? Original artist: ?

9.3

Content license

• Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0

